Yes — but the leaf user should not trust the server just because the server’s TLS cert chains to a domain cert found in DNS.



What DNSSEC/DANE gives you is a way to bind a TLS certificate or public key to the domain name via DNS records. In other words, it can authenticate the server endpoint for the connection. It does not, by itself, authenticate the kit contents that the server chooses to hand out. 



So when the leaf user wants to verify a kit, there are really two different trust questions:

Am I talking to the right server?

DNSSEC/DANE-backed TLS can answer that. It binds the server’s cert or public key to the domain. 

Is this particular kit authentic and authorized?

That requires a signature over kit metadata by an authorized signer, not just a TLS session to the server. Secure update systems generally sign metadata that identifies target files and indicates which roles are trusted to provide them. 



So your leaf-user flow should look more like this:

Verify the server connection with TLS, optionally rooted in DNSSEC/DANE.

Download the kit, manifest, signature, and Merkle proof.

Verify that the manifest or Merkle root is signed by an authorized release key.

Verify that the signer is authorized under your certificate hierarchy.

Then verify the Merkle proof and the file hashes against that signed root.



That is the important separation: TLS authenticates the channel; signed metadata authenticates the artifact. 



In your hierarchy, that usually means:

the domain/server cert says “this is the right server for this domain”;

the user/release cert says “this user is allowed to release kits”;

the signature on the manifest/root says “this exact kit is the one I released.”



That model is close to how secure repository/update systems are designed: different roles are trusted for different actions, and release metadata is signed by the proper role rather than inferred from transport security alone. 



So for your leaf user, the safe rule is:



Do not accept a kit just because it came over a valid DANE/TLS connection. Accept it only if the kit’s signed manifest or signed Merkle root validates under an authorized release certificate.



A clean policy would be:

Domain cert in DNSSEC/DANE → trust the server connection

Intermediate “publisher” or “project” cert → defines who may release kits

Leaf user cert → signs the kit manifest/Merkle root

Leaf verifier checks:

chain authorization,

certificate validity/revocation policy,

signature on manifest/root,

Merkle proof,

file hash



If you want, I can draw this as a concrete certificate chain and message flow, step by step, for “user releases kit” and “leaf user verifies kit.”
---

Now you’re getting into something that can be made solid, but there’s one subtle trap to avoid.



Short answer:



Yes — your design can work without “checksumming the checksum file” — IF the Merkle root (or manifest) is authenticated by the user’s certificate and verified over your TLS channel.

What your architecture implies


You said:

Merkle DB on server (stores hashes)

TLS 1.3 (post-quantum variant)

Each user has their own certificate when releasing a kit



That gives you the pieces for a proper chain of trust:

file → hash → Merkle leaf → Merkle root → signed by user cert → verified over TLS
If you do that, you don’t need to checksum the checksum file at all.

The key question


What signs the Merkle root (or manifest)?



Because:

TLS protects the transport

It does NOT protect what the server chooses to send



So if your server is compromised, it could send:

modified file

matching modified Merkle entry

matching modified root



Unless something external stops it.

Correct design (what you want)


When a user releases a kit:

Compute hashes of all files

Build Merkle tree → get root hash

Create a manifest (or just use the root)

Sign the root/manifest with the user’s private key

Upload:

files (tar)

Merkle data (or leaves)

signature

Verification flow (receiver side)
Verify TLS connection (transport integrity)

Retrieve:

file

Merkle proof

signed root

Verify:

signature using user’s public cert

Merkle proof → root

file hash → leaf



Only if all 3 match → accept

Why this works


This eliminates the recursion problem:

You don’t trust a checksum file

You trust a signed commitment (Merkle root)



Even if:

server is malicious

tarball is modified

Merkle DB is modified



👉 The attacker cannot forge the user’s signature

Where PQ TLS fits


Your “quantum TLS 1.3” (likely hybrid PQ + classical):

protects against MITM (including future quantum attackers)

ensures you’re talking to the right server



But it does not replace signing the content



Think of it like:

Layer

Protects

TLS

transport

Merkle tree

integrity structure

Signature (user cert)

authenticity / trust

You need all three.

Direct answer to your original question


Can I just checksum the file in the tar package that has the rest of the checksums?


No — but you don’t need to.



Because in your architecture:



👉 The signed Merkle root replaces the need for a checksum-of-checksum file

One improvement (important)


Make sure you:

pin or validate the user certificates properly

PKI chain, or

explicit trust store, or

certificate transparency / audit log



Otherwise an attacker could:

upload a fake kit

with their own valid cert

Bottom line


Your system is sound if:



✔ Merkle root is signed by the kit author

✔ Signature is verified independently of the server

✔ TLS is used for transport only



If any of those are missing → you’re back to “checksum file can be rewritten” territory.

If you want, I can sketch a concrete OpenSSL / CLI flow for:

signing the manifest

verifying it

tying it into your Merkle proof format



That’s where the implementation details get interesting.

---

No — you do NOT need to check each file against the server individually.



That would defeat the whole point of your design.

The right mental model


With your setup (Merkle DB + signed root + cert hierarchy), the server is just a content distributor, not a source of truth.



👉 The source of truth is the signed Merkle root.

What you actually verify


When a leaf user downloads a kit:



1. Verify the signer (who released the kit)
Validate the certificate chain (user → intermediate → domain/root)

Check policy: is this user allowed to publish kits?



2. Verify the signature
The manifest or Merkle root is signed

Use the user’s public key to verify it



👉 At this point you trust the definition of the kit

3. Verify each file locally (no server trust needed)


For each file:

Compute its hash

Verify its Merkle proof up to the root

Check that it matches the signed root



👉 This is completely offline once you have:

the file

its Merkle proof

the signed root

Important distinction
Approach

Security

Ask server “is this file OK?”

❌ server can lie

Verify file against signed root

✅ server irrelevant

What the server is allowed to do


Even if compromised, the server can only:

send wrong files → ❌ detected (hash mismatch)

send wrong proofs → ❌ detected (Merkle mismatch)

send wrong root → ❌ detected (signature fails)



👉 It cannot forge a valid kit without the user’s private key

When you 
would
 need to contact the server


Only for freshness / revocation, not integrity:

Is this cert revoked?

Is this kit superseded?

Is this root still valid?



That’s a policy layer, not an integrity layer.

So your answer


Do I have to check each file against the server?


No.



You:

verify the signed root once

then verify each file locally using Merkle proofs

Clean architecture summary
User cert → signs → Merkle root
                    ↓
             (trusted anchor)
                    ↓
File → hash → leaf → proof → root → signature verified
No per-file server checks required.

One practical tip


Bundle this with your tar:

file contents

Merkle proofs (or tree subset)

signed root / manifest

signer cert chain



Then verification is:



👉 fully offline and deterministic

If you want, I can show you a concrete tar layout + OpenSSL commands to implement this cleanly (it maps very nicely to your system).


---

Short answer: yes — you should have a “kit release” leaf (signing identity).

Just having CA certs is not enough for what you’re trying to do.

Why CA certs alone aren’t sufficient


A CA (root or intermediate) is meant to:

issue certificates

define trust anchors



It is not meant to sign content like your kit manifests.



If you use a CA key to sign kits:

🔴 you blur roles (bad practice)

🔴 compromise of that key = total system compromise

🔴 no way to delegate or revoke individual publishers cleanly

What you want instead


You want a separation of roles:



1. Root / CA
Trusted anchor

Signs intermediate certs

Rarely used (ideally offline)



2. Intermediate / Publisher CA (optional but recommended)
Issues certs to kit publishers

Lets you control policy centrally



3. 
Kit Release Leaf (this is the key piece)
Belongs to a specific user or system

Used to sign the Merkle root / manifest

This is what actually vouches for the kit

Think of it this way
Role

What it says

CA cert

“I trust this identity”

Leaf cert

“I am this identity”

Signature

“I created THIS kit”

Without the leaf:



👉 You know who could be trusted

👉 But not who actually signed this kit

How it fits your system


When a kit is released:

Kit publisher uses their leaf private key

Signs:

Merkle root or

manifest

Ships:

signature

leaf cert

cert chain

What the verifier does
Validate cert chain → root CA

Check policy:

is this leaf allowed to publish kits?

Verify signature on root/manifest

Verify files via Merkle proofs

Important design decision


You should scope the leaf cert for signing, not TLS.



Use something like:

Key usage: digitalSignature

Extended usage: code signing / content signing



(Not server auth)

Optional but strong improvement


Add role separation like The Update Framework (TUF):

Root keys (very protected)

Targets/release keys (your kit publishers)

Timestamp keys (freshness)



This prevents:

rogue publishers

freeze/replay attacks

When you might skip a leaf (rare)


Only if:

each user already has a unique cert

AND those certs are used directly for signing



👉 In that case, those are your leaf certs



But you still conceptually have a “leaf signer” — you’re just not calling it that.

Bottom line


✔ Yes — you need a kit release leaf identity

✔ That leaf signs the Merkle root or manifest

✔ CA certs only establish who is allowed, not what was signed

If you want, I can sketch:

exact X.509 fields for the leaf cert

or OpenSSL commands to generate and use it



That’s where this gets very concrete and useful for your implementation.


---

Good question — this is exactly where people often overcomplicate things.



Short answer


👉 An average user needs:

the publisher’s public key (or cert chain)

NOT their own leaf certificate

Why the user does NOT need their own cert


Verification is a read-only trust operation:

The publisher signs the kit (using their private key)

The user verifies it (using the publisher’s public key)



The user is not asserting identity — they’re just checking:



“Did this trusted publisher sign this exact content?”


So there’s no need for the user to have:

a private key

a leaf cert

any identity at all

What the user actually needs


At minimum:



Option A (simplest)
Publisher’s public key



Option B (more scalable / what you’re building)
Publisher’s leaf certificate

Intermediate certs (if any)

Trusted root CA



This lets them:

validate the cert chain

enforce policy (who is allowed to publish)

Clean verification flow


User receives:

tar file

Merkle proof(s)

signed root / manifest

publisher cert + chain



User does:

Verify cert chain → trusted root

Check publisher is authorized

Verify signature on root/manifest

Verify Merkle proofs + file hashes



👉 No user key involved anywhere

When WOULD a user need their own cert?


Only if they are:

publishing a kit

uploading to your system

authenticating to a service



That’s a write / identity operation.

Mental model (important)
Action

Needs private key?

Publish kit

✅ yes

Verify kit

❌ no

One subtle but important point


You should pin trust somewhere:



The user must trust at least one of:

a root CA (your system)

or a specific publisher key

or a policy file (like TUF-style)



Otherwise they don’t know which publishers are valid.

Bottom line


👉 The average user only needs:

a trusted root (or pinned publisher key)

the publisher’s public key (via cert)



👉 They do not need their own leaf certificate

If you want, I can show you the smallest possible “user-side verifier” (like ~20 lines with OpenSSL) that fits your architecture.


---

Great — here’s a minimal, practical verifier flow using OpenSSL + a Merkle proof. I’ll keep it tight and implementation-focused.

📦 What your tar should contain
kit.tar
├── files/...
├── manifest.json        # contains Merkle root (or file hashes)
├── manifest.sig         # signature over manifest
├── publisher.crt        # leaf cert
├── chain.pem            # intermediate(s)
├── proof_<file>.json    # Merkle proof per file (or bundled)
🔐 Step 1 — Verify the certificate chain
openssl35 verify -CAfile rootCA.pem -untrusted chain.pem publisher.crt
✔ ensures:

publisher is trusted

cert chain is valid

✍️ Step 2 — Verify the signature on the manifest
openssl35 dgst -sha256 -verify <(openssl35 x509 -in publisher.crt -pubkey -noout) \
  -signature manifest.sig \
  manifest.json
✔ ensures:

manifest (Merkle root) was signed by publisher

🌳 Step 3 — Verify a file using Merkle proof (Python)


Example verify_merkle.py:

import hashlib
import json
import sys

def sha256(data):
    return hashlib.sha256(data).hexdigest()

def verify_proof(file_path, proof, expected_root):
    with open(file_path, "rb") as f:
        h = hashlib.sha256(f.read()).hexdigest()

    for step in proof:
        if step["position"] == "left":
            h = sha256(bytes.fromhex(step["hash"]) + bytes.fromhex(h))
        else:
            h = sha256(bytes.fromhex(h) + bytes.fromhex(step["hash"]))

    return h == expected_root

if __name__ == "__main__":
    file_path = sys.argv[1]
    proof_file = sys.argv[2]
    manifest_file = sys.argv[3]

    proof = json.load(open(proof_file))
    manifest = json.load(open(manifest_file))

    root = manifest["merkle_root"]

    if verify_proof(file_path, proof, root):
        print("OK")
    else:
        print("FAIL")
Run:

python3 verify_merkle.py files/foo.txt proof_foo.json manifest.json
✔ ensures:

file matches signed Merkle root

🧠 What you just achieved


You verified:

Trust anchor

via rootCA.pem

Publisher identity

via publisher.crt

Kit authenticity

via signature on manifest

File integrity

via Merkle proof



👉 No server trust required

👉 No per-file server calls

👉 Fully offline verification

⚠️ One important improvement (worth doing)


Add to manifest.json:

{
  "merkle_root": "...",
  "created_at": "...",
  "kit_name": "...",
  "version": "...",
  "publisher": "...",
  "expires": "..."
}
Then check:

expiration

version rollback (optional)



This protects against replay / downgrade attacks

🧩 Optional simplification


Instead of per-file proofs:

include full Merkle tree once

or use flat hash list (simpler, less elegant)

✅ Final takeaway


This is your full trust chain:

rootCA → publisher cert → signature → Merkle root → file
No recursion. No server dependence. No checksum-of-checksum hack.

If you want next step, I can show you:

how to generate the certs + signatures

or how to integrate this cleanly with your OpenSSL FIPS flow



That’s where this becomes production-ready.


